I feel like I didn't explain my point properly about the EU and the problems I have with the way the EU functions. Firstly, I don't like that the EU is trying to get VETO rights removed. I understand that it can be a problem for the democratic process, but personally I think that by solving that problem, they will create one that is even larger, and that is totalitarian rule by the majority in a way that is not ethically justifiable. In The Netherlands we already kind of see this; in a sparsely populated part of our country, Groningen, people have been getting struck by small earthquakes once every while because of the delving of  gas in this area. Now, because the area is only sparsely populated and there is only two out of 150 parliament members who come from this region, we are seeing the process of fixing their houses being put on the backburner/neglected completely. With the removal of the VETO right, the EU as a collective could decide on something that is crippling for your state within the EU, and there would be nothing you can do about it. 

Secondly, like I said, the president of the EU commission has WAY too much power. Also, the way this president is chosen, is done behind closed doors. Very weird way for a democracy to function IMO. Behind these closed doors, they decided who would become the current EU commission president without a single eastern European member present. 

Thirdly, the ECB. The ECB's president is chosen by the EU comission president and sits for 10 years. This ECB president decides how many euro's get printed, and in the future might get insanely more powerful through the development of the ECB crypto currency. This ECB coin is planned to be used to decide how much you can get for your bitcoin, how much you pay for your bread, how much meat you can eat and how much co2 you are allowed to produce in general. I think these far stretching consequences are not in the right hands in such an undemocratically chosen representative.

Expanding the EU's power in its current form would lead to lobbies getting more power, not less. Expanding the EU's power will lead to citizens having less of a say in what happens in their county, not more. I think there is a good reason to want to be a part of a European Union, and I think it's good to have cooperation, but it will have to happen in a democratically sound institution or else power will corrupt absolute and bring suffering to the minority. 

And then there is also the problem for less prosperous nations of the "brain drain". I studied compsci in English at a university in Eindhoven for a year to try it out, and at this university, I met a lot of cool people from eastern Europe who I still regard as friends, A lot of them, however, have not returned to eastern Europe. They are very qualified, smart people who easily got themselves a green card in The Netherlands and now they work here. They aren't providing their home country with prosperity, but instead The Netherlands. 


abstract: The President of the European Commission, the head of the executive branch of the European Union (EU), holds significant power and influence within the EU. This raises concerns about the balance of power within the EU and the accountability of EU decision-makers to the citizens of the EU. One reason for these concerns is that the President is not directly elected by the citizens of the EU, but rather is chosen by the European Council, which is made up of the heads of state or government of the EU member states. This lack of direct accountability can lead to a perception that the President is not fully accountable to the citizens of the EU, which can have negative impacts on the legitimacy of EU decision-making. Additionally, the President has the authority to appoint and dismiss Commissioners, giving them significant control over the operations of the European Commission and the ability to shape the direction of EU policy. This authority could potentially allow the President to push their own will through by firing those Commissioners who disagree with them or do not support their policies, leading to a situation where the President is able to shape the direction of EU policy without sufficient checks and balances, and where the interests of the member states and the EU citizens are not adequately represented. This concentration of power and influence in the hands of the President could lead to a lack of diversity of viewpoints within the European Commission, which could be dangerous for the effectiveness and legitimacy of EU decision-making. The theory of the wisdom of crowds suggests that the collective judgment of a group of individuals can be more accurate and reliable than the judgment of a single expert, and diversity of viewpoints can be an important source of wisdom and can lead to better decision-making. There are also concerns about the level of participation and engagement of EU citizens in the democratic processes of the EU, with some studies finding that levels of political knowledge and trust vary significantly across different member states. It is important to ensure that the EU's system of decision-making is accountable and responsive to the needs and interests of the EU's citizens.
There have been a number of instances in which the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, as well as other aspects of the European Union's system, have been criticized and seen as potential problems.
One example is the way in which the EU responded to the refugee crisis that began in 2015. The EU's system of decision-making, which involves a complex network of institutions and bodies, made it difficult for the EU to act quickly and decisively to address the crisis. This led to criticism that the EU was not able to effectively respond to the crisis and protect the rights of refugees.
Another example is the way in which the EU has responded to the economic crisis that began in 2008. Some people have argued that the EU's response was too slow and insufficient, and that the EU's system of decision-making made it difficult for the EU to take the bold action that was needed. This led to criticism that the EU was not able to effectively respond to the crisis and protect the interests of its citizens.
here are a few more examples of instances in which the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, as well as other aspects of the European Union's system, have been seen as potential problems:
The way in which the EU responded to the coronavirus pandemic: Some people have argued that the EU was slow to respond to the pandemic and that the EU's system of decision-making made it difficult for the EU to take the bold action that was needed. This led to criticism that the EU was not able to effectively protect the health and well-being of its citizens.
The way in which the EU has responded to the climate crisis: Some people have argued that the EU has not done enough to address the climate crisis or has been irrational in it’s approach, and that the EU's system of decision-making has made it difficult for the EU to take the bold actions that are needed. This has led to criticism that the EU is not effectively addressing one of the most pressing issues facing the world today.
The way in which the EU has responded to the UK's decision to leave the EU: The process of the UK's withdrawal from the EU, known as Brexit, has been complex and contentious, and some people have argued that the EU's system of decision-making has made it difficult for the EU to effectively respond to the UK's decision. This has led to criticism that the EU is not able to effectively manage the process of Brexit and protect the interests of its member states.
These are just a few examples of instances in which the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, as well as other aspects of the EU's system, have been seen as potential problems and led to criticism of the EU's effectiveness.
It is difficult to say definitively whether the President of the European Commission was at fault in any specific cases, as it would depend on the specific circumstances and the broader context of the situation.
In general, the President of the European Commission is responsible for proposing and implementing EU policies, as well as representing the EU internationally. If there are perceived shortcomings or problems with EU policies or actions, it is possible that the President of the European Commission could be held at least partially responsible. However, it is also important to consider the role of other actors, such as the European Council, the European Parliament, and the member states of the EU, as they also play a role in shaping EU policies and actions.
The President of the European Commission, the head of the European Commission, the executive branch of the European Union (EU), has significant influence and power within the EU. This is a concern because it raises questions about the balance of power within the EU and the accountability of EU decision-makers to the citizens of the EU.
One reason why the President of the European Commission may have too much power is that they are not directly elected by the citizens of the EU, but rather are chosen behind closed doors by the European Council, which is made up of the heads of state or government of the EU member states. This means that the President may not be accountable to the citizens of the EU in the same way as a directly elected leader.

This leaves open the possibility that the fact that with the voting of the European Council members on the election of a new President of the European Commission not being made public could lead to the heads of state or government of the EU member states lying about whether they voted for or against the candidate. If the voting is not made public, there is no way to verify whether the heads of state or government are being truthful about their vote. This could potentially lead to a situation where the President of the European Commission is not elected in a transparent and democratic manner.

The European Parliament has on occasion voted against the candidate proposed by the European Council for the President of the European Commission. This has happened on a few occasions in the past, most recently in 2019 when the European Parliament rejected the proposed candidate, Jean-Claude Juncker's proposed successor, Ursula von der Leyen, in the first round of voting. The European Parliament ultimately approved von der Leyen in the second round of voting. More importantly, we don’t know why she was approved in a second round of voting; what kind of threats or deals were made and given to the people who disapproved of her? 

Other than this, it is also glaringly obvious that European Citizens have far too little knowledge about the going ons in Brussels. There does not seem to be enough engagement to consider this undemocratically chosen commission leader as properly scrutinized by the people she leads. 
In the study "The Impact of Political Knowledge and Trust on the Legitimacy of the European Union" by Sara Hobolt and Catherine de Vries, the researchers used a measure of political knowledge that was based on the respondents' scores on a series of questions designed to test their knowledge of EU institutions and policies. The questions covered a range of topics, including the role of the European Parliament, the decision-making processes of the EU, and the EU's relationship with other countries.
The study found that overall, levels of political knowledge among EU citizens were relatively low. Specifically, the study found that on average, EU citizens scored just 44% on the political knowledge test, with a standard deviation of 19%. This suggests that while some EU citizens had relatively high levels of political knowledge, others had much lower levels.

Additionally, the President of the European Commission has the authority to appoint and dismiss the Commissioners, who are responsible for implementing EU policies in specific policy areas. This gives the President significant control over the operations of the European Commission and the ability to shape the direction of EU policy. This authority could allow the President to push their own will through by firing those Commissioners who disagree with them or who do not support their policies, leading to a situation where the President is able to shape the direction of EU policy without sufficient checks and balances, and where the interests of the member states and the EU citizens are not adequately represented.
Finally, the President of the European Commission plays a key role in representing the EU internationally, including negotiating with other countries on behalf of the EU. This gives the President significant influence in shaping the EU's relations with the rest of the world.
Overall, the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission raise concerns about the balance of power within the EU and the accountability of EU decision-makers to the citizens of the EU. This is a danger to democracy because it undermines the principles of accountability and representation that are fundamental to democratic systems.
In the context of Michel Foucault's theory of power, the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission could lead to self-censorship among those who are subject to the President's authority, as they may feel pressure to conform to the expectations and priorities of the President in order to avoid negative consequences, such as being dismissed from their position. This self-censorship could lead to a lack of diversity of viewpoints and perspectives within the European Commission, which could have negative impacts on the effectiveness and legitimacy of EU decision-making. This is not something that is unique to the EU, however, as, to give an example, in The Netherlands we just recently saw a similarly questionable firing of Mona Keizer for outing her complaints about the coronavirus measures. She was a deputy minister, however, deputy ministers do not have any saying power and as such do not bear the power of the function, yet still she was fired for stepping out of line. 
Overall, the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, as well as other aspects of the EU's system, raise concerns about the balance of power within the EU and the accountability of EU decision-makers to the citizens of the EU. These concerns are particularly relevant in the context of Michel Foucault's theory of power, as they highlight the potential for self-censorship and the impact this could have on the effectiveness and legitimacy of EU decision-making. It is important that the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, as well as other aspects of the EU's system, are balanced and accountable in order to ensure that the EU is able to effectively serve the needs and interests of its citizens.
The potential for lack of diversity of viewpoints within the European Commission, which would be a result of the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, could be dangerous to the effectiveness and legitimacy of EU decision-making. This is because diversity of viewpoints can be an important source of wisdom and can lead to better decision-making.
The theory of the wisdom of crowds, developed by statistician Francis Galton in the late 19th century, suggests that the collective judgment of a group of individuals can be more accurate and reliable than the judgment of a single expert. This theory has been supported by a number of empirical studies, including a famous study by James Surowiecki in which he found that the average estimate of the weight of an ox made by a group of people was more accurate than the estimate made by any individual member of the group.
In the context of the EU, a diverse group of Commissioners with different viewpoints and perspectives could be more likely to make better decisions than a group with a more homogenous perspective. This is because the diverse group would be able to consider a wider range of perspectives and would be more likely to identify and address potential biases and limitations in their thinking.
Overall, the chance for lack of diversity of viewpoints within the European Commission could be dangerous for the effectiveness and legitimacy of EU decision-making, and could be addressed by ensuring that the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission are balanced and accountable in order to allow for a diverse range of viewpoints to be represented within the European Commission. This could lead to better decision-making and a more effective and legitimate EU.

The concept of the wisdom of crowds, which suggests that the collective judgment of a group of individuals can be more accurate and reliable than the judgment of a single expert, is already used in our free market system in the form of the invisible hand. The concept of the invisible hand, developed by economist Adam Smith in the 18th century, suggests that individuals pursuing their own self-interest in a free market will ultimately promote the greater good, as the collective actions of individuals will tend to produce the most efficient and optimal outcomes.
Overall, the President of the European Commission has significant influence and power within the EU, which raises concerns about the balance of power within the EU and the accountability of EU decision-makers to the citizens of the EU. The President is not directly elected by the citizens of the EU, but rather is chosen by the European Council, which means that they may not be accountable to the citizens in the same way as a directly elected leader. 
The President also has the authority to appoint and dismiss the Commissioners, which gives them significant control over the operations of the European Commission and the ability to shape the direction of EU policy. This authority could allow the President to push their own will through by firing those Commissioners who disagree with them or who do not support their policies, leading to a situation where the interests of the member states and the EU citizens are not adequately represented. 
The President also plays a key role in representing the EU internationally, which gives them significant influence in shaping the EU's relations with the rest of the world. In the context of Michel Foucault's theory of power, the powers and influence of the President could lead to self-censorship among those who are subject to the President's authority.
The lack of diversity of viewpoints within the European Commission, which could be a result of the powers and influence of the President, could be dangerous for the effectiveness and legitimacy of EU decision-making. 
It is important that the powers and influence of the President of the European Commission, as well as other aspects of the EU's system, are balanced and accountable in order to ensure that the EU is able to effectively serve the needs and interests of its citizens.
Thirdly, there is the issue of ministries ignoring the voice of the parliaments’ voting about certain subjects like a European digital identity. 
The European digital identity is a proposed system that would allow EU citizens to access public and private services across the EU using a single online identity. The European Commission presented its proposal for a regulation on this system in June 2021, aiming to create a secure and interoperable framework that respects data protection and privacy rights.

However, not everyone is enthusiastic about this idea. In November 2021, a majority of the Dutch parliament supported a motion (motie) by SP MP Renske Leijten that asked the government not to agree with the Council conclusions on the European digital identity. The motion expressed concerns about the storage of data and biometrics, the role of private parties, and the lack of democratic oversight and transparency in the development of this system.

Despite this motion, State Secretary for Digital Affairs Alexandra van Huffelen decided to ignore it and agreed with the Council conclusions on behalf of the Netherlands during a meeting on December 6th. She argued that rejecting the conclusions would isolate the Netherlands from other EU countries and prevent it from influencing future decisions on this matter. She also claimed that she had addressed some of the concerns raised by Leijten during her speech at the meeting.

This decision sparked outrage among some MPs, who accused Van Huffelen of disrespecting parliamentary democracy and undermining national sovereignty. They also questioned her motives and competence as a state secretary for digital affairs. They demanded an explanation from her and threatened to file a motion of no confidence if she did not comply.

Van Huffelen's action can be seen as harmful for democracy in several ways. First, it violates
the principle of separation of powers, which requires that different branches of government check
and balance each other. By ignoring a motion supported by a majority of parliament, Van Huffelen
overstepped her authority as an executive member and disregarded the legislative power of parliament.

Second, it undermines public trust in democratic institutions and processes. By going against
the will of parliament, Van Huffelen showed contempt for its role as a representative body of
the people. She also ignored or dismissed legitimate concerns about data protection,
privacy rights, and democratic accountability that many citizens share. This could erode public confidence in both national and European governance.

Third, it weakens democratic participation and influence in European affairs. By agreeing with
the Council conclusions without consulting parliament or seeking its consent, Van Huffelen reduced
the role of parliament to a mere spectator or rubber stamp in EU decision-making.
She also deprived Dutch citizens of their voice and input in shaping their own digital future.

In conclusion, Van Huffelen's decision to ignore a parliamentary motion on the European digital identity was undemocratic and harmful for democracy at both national and European levels.
She violated constitutional principles,
undermined public trust,
and weakened democratic participation.
She should have respected parliament's authority,
addressed its concerns,
and sought its approval before agreeing with any EU proposals on this matter.


She is also not the only example of things like this happening. For example: 


In 2019, French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Angela Merkel agreed on a deal to nominate Ursula von der Leyen as the president of the European Commission, despite opposition from their own parties and parliaments. The deal was seen as a betrayal of democracy by many MEPs and national MPs who had supported other candidates1.

In 2019, French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Angela Merkel agreed on a deal to nominate Ursula von der Leyen as the president of the European Commission, despite opposition from their own parties and parliaments. The deal was seen as a betrayal of democracy by many MEPs and national MPs who had supported other candidates1.

In 2021, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson signed a post-Brexit trade deal with the EU that was criticized by many MPs for creating barriers and frictions for British businesses and consumers. The deal was rushed through parliament without proper scrutiny or debate, leaving many MPs feeling sidelined and ignored. Some MPs also accused Johnson of breaking international law by violating parts of the Northern Ireland protocol34.






Barack Obama, in his book "The Audacity of Hope" wrote about the need for transparency and accountability in government, and cautioned about the potential for power and influence to be concentrated in the hands of a few, which could lead to a "deep state"

Thomas Jefferson, who served as president from 1801-1809, spoke about the dangers of powerful interests and the need for transparency in government. In a letter to a friend, he wrote, "I sincerely believe that banking establishments are more dangerous than standing armies."
Andrew Jackson, who served as president from 1829-1837, was known for his opposition to the influence of powerful bankers and wealthy individuals over government policy. He stated "Gentlemen, I too have been a close observer of the doings of the Bank of the United States. I have had men watching you for a long time, and am convinced that you have used the funds of the bank to speculate in the breadstuffs of the country. When you won, you divided the profits amongst you, and when you lost, you charged it to the bank."
Abraham Lincoln, who served as president from 1861-1865, spoke about the need for transparency in government and the dangers of powerful interests and groups. In his speeches, he emphasized the importance of government serving the interests of all citizens and not just a select few.
Theodore Roosevelt, who served as president from 1901-1909, spoke out against the influence of powerful corporations and the need for government regulation to protect the public interest. He stated, "The great corporate interests which profit by the exploitation of the poor and by the restriction of the suffrage, will, in the end, have to reckon with the political power of the aroused people."
Woodrow Wilson, who served as president from 1913-1921, spoke about the need for transparency and accountability in government and the dangers of powerful interests and groups. In his book "The New Freedom", he wrote, "The government, which was designed for the people, has got into the hands of bosses and their employers, the special interests. An invisible empire has been set up above the forms of democracy."

